

#14.1
I could repair bicycles. / Could I repair bicycles? / I couldn't repair bicycles. 
You could bring up hooligans. / Could you bring up hooligans? /You couldn't bring up hooligans. 
She could get on well with everybody. / Could she get on well with everybody? / She couldn’t get on well with everybody. 
We could build luxurious hotels. / Could we build luxurious hotels? / We couldn’t build luxurious hotels. 
Last year you could pay in cash. / Could you pay in cash last year? / You couldn’t pay in cash last year.  
I managed to repair my bicycle. / Did I manage to repair my bicycle? / I didn’t manage to repair my bicycle. 
You managed to bring up a real hooligan. / Did you manage to bring up a real hooligan? / You didn’t manage to bring up a real hooligan. 
He managed to get on well with my parents. / Did she manage to get on well with my parents? / She didn’t manage to get on well with my parents. 
He managed to build this luxurious hotel within (in) 2 years. / Did we manage to build this luxurious hotel within (in) 2 years? / We didn’t manage to build this luxurious hotel within (in) 2 years.  
I managed to pay by credit card yesterday. / Did I manage to pay by credit card yesterday? / I didn’t manage to pay by credit card yesterday.

#14.2
I show off every day. I’m showing off now. I have been showing off since morning. I showed off yesterday. I used to show off. I would show off in childhood. I could show off when mum was out yesterday. I managed to show off at the lesson. 

You usually lose your handkerchiefs. You are losing temper now. You have been losing your handkerchiefs since childhood. You lost your handkerchief yesterday. You used to lose your handkerchiefs all the time. You would lose your handkerchiefs at school. You could lose everything when you lived with your granny and she never punished you. You managed to lose my favorite handkerchief.
On the whole, she gets on with people. She is getting on with her husband at the moment. She has been getting on with adults from birth. She got on with her mother-in-law last summer. She used to get on with her mother-in-law. She would get on with everyone in our school. She could get on with everybody when she was in a good mood. Yesterday she managed to get on with a gang of hooligans.

#15.1
I was sleeping from 10 till 12 yesterday. / Was I sleeping from 10till 12 yesterday? / I wasn't sleeping from 10 till 12 yesterday.
You were having lunch when the telephone rang. / Were you having lunch when the telephone rang? / You weren't having lunch when the telephone rang. 
He was crossing the street when he saw a policeman. / Was he crossing the street when he saw a policeman? / He wasn’t crossing the street when he saw a policeman.
We were swimming while mum was making lunch. / Were we swimming while mum was making lunch? / We weren't swimming while mum was making lunch.
You were driving at a high speed when an accident happened. / Were you driving at a high speed when an accident happened? /You weren’t driving at a high speed when an accident happened.
They were waiting for us when we arrived at the hotel. / Were they waiting for us when we arrived at the hotel? / They weren’t waiting for us when we arrived at the hotel.
I burnt my hand while I was making lunch. / Did I burn my hand while I was making lunch? / I didn’t burn my hand while I was making lunch.
You were trying to find a well-paid job when I saw you for the last time. / Were you trying to find a well-paid job when I saw you for the last time? / You weren’t trying to find a well-paid job when I saw you for the last time.
He was looking the other way when I noticed her. / Was she looking the other way when I noticed her? / She wasn't looking the other way when I noticed her.
He was going along the street when he suddenly heard some foot-steps behind. / Was he going along the street when he suddenly heard some footsteps behind? / He wasn’t going along the street when he suddenly heard some footsteps behind.

#15.2
I always sail against the wind. I'm sailing against the wind at the moment. I have been sailing against the wind from birth. I sailed against the wind in youth. I would sail against the wind in youth. I used to sail against the wind regularly, but things are different now. I was sailing against the wind while all people of my age were stuck in a rut. I was sailing against the wind when suddenly I felt terribly tired. 

You seldom write letters to your relatives. You are writing a letter — I can see. You have been writing a letter for 2 hours. You were writing a letter when I came to see you. You used to write letters very often, but now you are very busy at work. You wrote a letter to me yesterday. You were writing letters from 2 till 5 yesterday. You always wrote to me about your problems. 

He usually plays the fool at the lessons. He is playing the fool at work now. He has been playing the fool from birth. He often played the fool in youth. He would play the fool in the country. He used to play the fool when he was a guest. He was playing the fool when we first saw him.

#16.1
I have already lost my heart. / Have I lost my heart yet? / I haven’t lost my heart yet.
You have already lost your head. / Have you lost your head yet? /You haven’t lost your head yet.
He has already set the world on fire. / Has he set the world on fire yet? / He hasn't set the world on fire yet.
She has already cleared the air. / Has she cleared the air yet? / She hasn’t cleared the air yet.
He have already put all our eggs in one basket. / Have we put all our eggs in one basket yet? / We haven't put all our eggs in one basket.
You have already had lunch. / Have you had lunch yet? / You haven’t had lunch yet.
They have already watched this movie. / Have they watched this movie yet? / They haven't watched this movie yet.
I have already saved some money. / Have I saved any money yet? /I haven’t saved any money yet. You have already made me crazy. / Have you made me crazy yet? /You haven’t made me crazy yet.
He has already adapted himself to living abroad. / Has he adapted himself to living abroad yet? / He hasn’t adapted himself to living abroad yet.

#16.2 [X]

#17.1
I have just come. / Have I just come? / I haven't just come.
You have already got this letter. / Have you got this letter yet? /You haven't got this letter yet.
He has written a lot lately. / Has he written a lot lately? / He hasn’t written a lot lately.
She has read this book for ages. / Has she read this book for a while? / She hasn’t read this book for ages.
I have cut my finger. / Have I cut my finger? / I haven’t cut my finger.
You have given up smoking. / Have you given up smoking? / You haven’t given up smoking.
 It has stopped raining. / Has it stopped raining? / It hasn’t stopped raining.
It’s the first time I’ve been to London. / Is it the first time I’ve been to London? / It isn’t the first time I’ve been to London.
It’s the third time I’ve spoken to a foreigner. / Is it the third time I’ve spoken to a foreigner? / It isn’t the third time I’ve spoken to a foreigner.
She has watched this movie 7 times. / Has she watched this movie7 times? / She hasn’t watched this movie 7 times.

#17.2
I ate an apple yesterday. I have eaten an apple today. When I was seating an apple yesterday, I choked. You read his letter last week. You have just read his letter. Have you read his letter yet? Have you already read his letter? He has never looked at me. He never looked at me in childhood. He wasn’t looking at me while I was blowing him kisses. She wasn’t there yesterday. She hasn’t been there these days. She hasn’t been there since childhood. She wasn’t there when I got in(came in). She hasn’t been there for ages. Have you ever quarreled with your parents? Did you ever quarrel with your parents in childhood? I learn good poems by heart with great pleasure. I’ve just learnt a marvelous poem by heart. Stop learning all sorts of rubbish by heart! When I was learning this poem by heart, the door opened and my mum entered the room. We’ve been at a low ebb since New Year’s Day. We would be at a low ebb in youth, but never suffered from it. Fancy that! The boy has been out of hand again! Don’t listen to reason. It’s boring! She has a screw loose! She has quarreled with all her acquaintances/friends!

#18.1
I had made an amazing dish by the guests’ arrival. You had learnt to play by ear before you entered the music school. He had shut her eyes to his past before he proposed to her.  I had known him before the war. He had put his nose in the air before he defended a thesis. You had started finding fault with me before you knew the truth. He had read all the recommended books by the beginning of the school year. This boy had sat here before we came. He had bought the presents by the 27th of June.  I had worried a lot before I heard from them.

#18.2
I know all. I have known him for ages. I know that you are looking at me now. I knew him in childhood. I had known him before he came in our class. We are close friends. We have been friends since childhood. We had been friends before we began to work in the same school. We were friends last year. We used to be friends. To my mind, she is married. She has been married for 2 years. I have put on a lot of weight and I am on a diet now. I had put on weight before I got married. I put on weight last year. I put on weight, and then I went on a diet and grew thin. He is in love with him. She has been in love with him since child-hood. She had been in love with him before they became acquainted personally. My grandpa has never traveled by air. My grandpa was very nervous during the flight, because he had never traveled by air before.  I met her a few days ago, she had just come back from Prague. She is at home, go to see her, she has just come back from Prague. He wasn't hungry, because she had just had breakfast. In general, she hardly ever has breakfast. She used to have breakfast when she was at school, but now she doesn't have time for breakfast. When we arrived at the cinema, the film had already begun. The film began after we had arrived at the cinema. We arrived at the cinema, took our seats and the film began.  Had been at home by 5 o’clock. I was at home when the phone rang. I was at home while my friends were getting ready for the exams. I didn’t use to be at home very often, but I have turned into a real stay-at-home. I am always at home in the evenings.


#19.2b
Hardly had I seen her when I lost the gift of speech. She was so beautiful! Perhaps, she was the most beautiful girl that I had ever seen. It was rumored that she had lived in Paris before she moved to our town. When I saw her for the first time, she was looking out of the window and singing a funny song. I was in a great hurry, so I didn't manage to get an all-round view. But in spite of this, scarcely had I seen her when I was head over heels in love. It couldn't be helped! The next day I proposed to her. Strangely enough, she agreed immediately. We have been married for 20 years and haven’t quarreled so far.

#20.2a
I am so exhausted because I have been going shopping. You are such a slowcoach because you have been watching TV. Why is she so wet? — Because she has been running in the rain. What has he been doing? Why is he so irritated? They are so pleased because they have been playing football.

#21.2
I had been explaining this rule to you for half a lesson before I gave you a test. I have already explained this rule to you. I had explained the r11le before I gave a test. While I was explaining the rule, you were talking to each other. 

You apologize to me every day. You apologized to me yesterday. You have apologized to me today. While you were apologizing to me, I felt pity. You used to apologize to me. You had been apologizing to me for a long time but I didn’t forgive (excuse) you for all that. 

He always took care of his kin. He has taken care of everybody. He had been taking care of his sister before she got married to the right person. He was taking care of me while you were playing the fool through inexperience.



#22.2
I don't approve of his behaviour. I didn’t approve of his behaviour yesterday. I hadn’t approved of his behaviour before he explained the motive. I used to approve of his behaviour but I don't like it any more. I’l1 never approve of your option (choice). 

All of us depend on our government. We have always depended on them. We depended on them last year. We'll depend on them next year. We used to depend on communists, but things are different now. She has never dreamt of being a film star. She dreamt of being a filmstar in childhood. She used to dream of being a film star. She often dreams of being rich and healthy. She would dream of being a top-model. After a while she will begin to dream of being a top-model.








#23.2
I like to go sightseeing in old towns. Yesterday when I was go-ing sightseeing, I met my old friends. I usually go sightseeing onSaturdays. Well, tomorrow we are going sightseeing and the dayafter tomorrow we are becoming brown on the beach. We’ll seethe sights of age-old Russian town Novgorod during our summerhike/walking tour. He is so thick-skinned! Once in a blue moon wesee the sights of such a marvelous town but he doesn't care! As alast resort, I’ll go sightseeing tomorrow after dinner. Childrenwould feel exhausted after we had gone sightseeing during oursummer walking tours.  usually get up early. He has just got up. He got up 2 minutesago. I had got up before I heard a noise. When are you getting uptomorrow? Will you get up in the end? Watch out, it seems to me,she is getting up. I’ve never got up early. I never get up early. I’llnever get up early. When I was getting up, I felt dizzy. hy do you always run away from me? Why are you runningaway from me? Why did you run away from me yesterday? Whywere you running away from me while I was running after you ata top speed? Why did you use to run away from me? Why didn’tyou run away from me in childhood? Why have you never runaway from me? Why do you never run away from me?

#24.1
I’m going to spend all my money on smart clothes. / Am I going tospend all my money on smart clothes? / I’m not going to spend allmy money on smart clothes. ou were going to concentrate on your work. e is going to have success at games. e are going to provide you with everything necessary. hey are going to divide our class into several groups. e is going to insist on his rights. 'm going to do a paper. hey are going to do research. e are going to do our assignment. hey are going to get a profit.

#24.2
My husband never goes into details when he tells about his scien-tific work. I am not about to go into details of our private life, atany rate, not for the time present. He has already taken a decision. He is going to take a decision. e'll take a decision tomorrow. He had taken a decision before hemet the lawyer. He managed/was able to take the decision worthyof Solomon. She dressed her daughter in red for the carnival. My mummy al-ways dresses me tastefully. She is going to dress her like a doll. y parents used to dress me. I'll dress her in a couple of minutes. 'll put it on in a couple of minutes.

#25.1
I'll write a letter if I have time. / Will I write a letter if I havetime? / I won't write a letter if I have time. ou'll phone me when you come back home from work. he will give me her address when she finds the right flat. e'll come to see you when we are in London.  won't give you a treat if you are late. e'll get wet if we go out. he won't talk to you until you apologize to her. 'll go straight home after I have done all the purchases (buying). 'll have a rest while my parents are out. We'll write down the title of the book in case we forget it. I'll draw a plan of the town in case you get lost. He won't be able to understand you if you don't speak distinctlyand slowly. I'm going to find another job if the company doesn't offer me abigger salary.  won't go to the party if you go there. e will do his homework as soon as he comes back home. ou can borrow the money providing that you give it back as soonas it is possible. he will read every day providing that you give her the right books. ou won’t get in unless you are a member of the club. ’1l buy you a present if you are good. e’ll go to sea when the weather is warmer.

#25-2
[X]

#26.1
I have cooked lunch before he goes out. / Will I have cooked lunch before he goes out? / I won't have cooked lunch before he goes out. You will have fallen asleep before I put out the light. She will have left the town before you find her. He will have earned the necessary sum of money by the time you offer him help. We will have brought everything in order before you enter the1'00II1. he will have known this stunning piece of news by the end of the day. I will have phoned you before I take the final decision. She will have told you her ins and outs before the journalists want to take an interview with her. ‘ll have dropped my acquaintance with the Browns before the head of the family demands extra payment for the rent of the flat. he‘ll have pretended to be a foreigner before she gets out of the car.

#26.2
For a change, from time to time I think before I take a decision todo something. on't think about this crying shame. 'll have used my head before I get this crazy idea out of my mind.  used to think about it as a child. on’t bother me, I’m thinking.  think you should get this crazy idea out of your mind. ith all my heart I advise you to think about it. hink about it at your convenience. ’ve been thinking about this since morning and I’ve thought outnothing so far. ’ve never thought about it.  never think about it. ’ll never think about it when I grow up. ’ve just thought about you.  was thinking about you when you phoned me.  used to think about you very often. ave you ever thought about such great success?We would think together about the future of the mankind. ’ll think about it when it stops raining.  had been thinking about it for many years before I began to real-ize my idea. 'm thinking about you all day long. obody has ever thought about it. id you think about it yesterday?Have you thought about it?When will you think about it?Are you going to think about your career?Any man of worth from time to time thinks about his future. ill you have thought over my proposal before I phone you?He is a man of his word, I know it from experience, and he alwaysthinks before he makes promises providing that he knows all thedetails of the matter. ave you thought twice yet?Have you already thought over my proposal?


#27.2
Year in, year out luckless people apply to their more successfulfriends for a job. You’ll be sick to death if you apply to him for a job. In short, you’ll apply for a job when pigs fly. hen I applied to him for a job last year, he was up to his ears inhis business. What is eating him? When I was applying to him for a job thistime yesterday, he looked so furious but absolutely exhausted atthe same time. Have you applied to anybody for a job yet?I know it at first hand that if you don't apply to him for a job hewill never offer it to you himself. hen my ship comes home, I won’t apply to my friends for a jobevery month. lease, hold me by the hand while I’m applying to my ex-husbandfor a job tomorrow. f he doesn’t apply for a job, I won’t lend him money. ’ve never applied to my kin for a job.  used to apply to him for jobs but I've missed the bus: he has losteverything himself. ntil you apply for a job, I won’t lend you money. e applied to me for a job but I pretended to be ill. fter he had applied to my dad for a job, we dropped our acquaint-ance.

#28.1
In August we’ll have been living in this town for 8 years. / Will wehave been living in this town for 8 years in August? / We won’thave been living in this town for 8 years in August. n three minutes you’ll have been writing this test for half anhour. When he is forty he’ll have been studying English for 15 years. Next June we’ll have been friends for 28 years. In ten minutes we’ll have been listening to your rubbish for anhour. e’1l have been arguing with his kin for an hour before he leaveshome. n September we’ll have been saving up to buy her a present for ayear. omorrow they'll have been married for 25 years. hen I am 64, I'll have been a fan of «Beatles» for 50 years. n 5 minutes he’ll have been interviewing this filmstar for threehours.


#29.2
I'm hungry. She says she is hungry. She said she was hungry. Shehas just said she is hungry. She said she had been hungry beforeshe went to work. She said she had been hungry since morning. he asked me if I was hungry. She asked me why I was hungry. he wondered if I had been hungry before I sat down to the table. e is stuck in a hole and he has no money to pay for his flat. Hesays he is stuck in a hole and he has no money to pay for his flat. e confessed he was stuck in a hole and had no money to pay forhis flat. Today he has declared for everyone to hear that he isstuck in a hole and has no money to pay for the flat. They won-dered if he had any debts. They tried to find out if he had moneyto pay for the flat. They want to know why I have no money to payfor the flat. Do you want to know if I can pay for the flat? Did youwant to find out if I could pay for the flat? Do you want to knowwhen I will pay for the flat? He wondered if I was going to getclear of debts in the foreseeable future. ow long are you going to stay in our town? He wonders how longwe are going to stay here. He tried to find out how long we weregoing to stay there. He wondered if we would have been there be-fore it started raining. Do you want to know if we will have beenhere till Christmas? Why didn't you try to find out how long theywere going to stay there? Do you guess why he didn't ask themhow long they were going to stay there? He has just told me thathe won’t be able to find out how long they are going to stay here. ’ve just found out how long they are going to stay here. e can't afford to spend money like water. They say they can’tafford to spend money like water. They confessed they couldn’tafford to spend money like water. They complained that underthe circumstances or, rather, in their parents’ presence theycouldn’t afford to spend money like water. Are you pleased withthe fact that you can spend money like water? They wondered ifwe were pleased with the fact that we could afford to spend moneylike water at last. I was not sure we could afford to spend moneylike water. Are you sure that you can afford to throw your moneyaround?She failed her exams at university. She said she had failed her ex-ams at university. She confessed that she had failed her exams atuniversity ever the previous year/the year before. She is cryingbecause she has failed the exam. He wondered why she had failedher exams. Didn’t you wonder why she had failed her exams? Didshe tell you that she had failed her exams? I don’t know when shewill confess to her parents that she has failed the exams.